DOCS-9227-db-connection-examples-kt (#1100)
mulesoft/docs-connectors: db/1.8/modules/ROOT/pages/database-connector-connection.adoc

> = Configure a Database Connection

Reviewer: Consider adding Examples to the topic title.

> Anypoint Connector for Database (Database Connector) can connect to any database for which a JDBC driver is available. The following examples show how to connect to the most popular databases such as Derby, Microsoft SQL Server, MySQL, Oracle, and a generic database. Additionally, for advanced uses cases, there are examples to connect to a global data source, configure a JDBC driver, and configure connection pooling, both in Anypoint Studio and the XML editor.

Reviewer 2: ditto previous edits to this same text in #1113 and also...:
```suggestion
Anypoint Connector for Database (Database Connector) can connect to any database for which a JDBC driver is available. The following examples show how to connect to the most popular databases such as Derby, Microsoft SQL Server, MySQL, Oracle, and a generic database. Additionally, for advanced uses cases, there are examples showing how to connect to a global data source, configure a JDBC driver, and configure connection pooling, both in Anypoint Studio and the XML editor.
```

> == Configure Data Source Reference Connection

Reviewer: I think you need to add "a" here and elsewhere: Configure a Data Source Reference Connection.

> When you configure a *Generic Connection* type, Database Connector uses the parameter values you provide to generate a JDBC data source. In some cases, you might want to create your own data source.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure why we are boldfacing and capitalizing generic connection; we typically use this formatting when referring to the UI label as a UI label, not as the thing it represents:

     Use the *Generic Connection* field to name your generic connection.

Maybe...:
```suggestion
Database Connector generates a JDBC data source by using the parameter values you provide when you configure *Generic Connection*. If you want to create your own data source and use it to connect to a database, configure *Data Source Reference Connection*.
```

Reviewer 2: However, now that I see the task, I am a little worried that these topics might not be using proper formatting; please refer to "font choices" is the style ref.

Briefly, 
UI labels = bold (* *)
but 
syntax = mono (` `)

> Thereby, you can use the *Data Source Reference Connection* type to connect to a database referencing a data source.

Reviewer 2: See suggestion above.
If you do not use the suggestion, omit/replace "thereby": it sounds kind of awkward in this context because it generally refers to a result rather than a method. "Therefore" is probably a better choice for the original text.

> The following example shows how to configure in Anypoint Studio a *Data Source Reference Connection* to connect to a Derby database:

Reviewer 2: The following example does not refer to any UI element named *Data Source Reference Connection*.
I think what we really mean is:
```suggestion
The following example shows how to use Anypoint Studio to configure a data source reference connection to a Derby database:
```

> . In Studio, in the `src/main/resources` folder, create a `datasource-config.xml` bean file to define a custom `enhydra` data source that connects to a Derby database:

Reviewer 2: I don't see `datasource-config.xml` in the example; do we mean:
```suggestion
. In Studio, in the `src/main/resources` folder, create a bean file to define a custom `enhydra` data source that connects to a Derby database:
```

+
[source,xml,linenums]
----
<bean id="jdbcDataSource" class="org.enhydra.jdbc.standard.StandardDataSource"
 destroy-method="shutdown">
   <property name="driverName" value="org.apache.derby.jdbc.EmbeddedDriver"/>
   <property name="url" value="jdbc:derby:muleEmbeddedDB;create=true"/>
</bean>
----
+
. Return to your Mule flow, go to the *Global Elements* view, and click *Create* to open the *Choose Global Type* window.

> . In *Filter* write `spring`, select *Spring Config*, and click *OK*.

Reviewer: In the *Filter* field...

> . In the *Filter* field write `spring`, select *Spring Config*, and click *OK*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. In the *Filter* field, type `spring`, select *Spring Config*, and click *OK*.
```

> . In the *Spring Config* window, for *Files* add `datasource-config.xml` to reference the spring configuration file with the *Spring module*.

Reviewer 2: I'm guessing *Spring module* is not a UI label?
```suggestion
. In the *Spring Config* window, for *Files*, add `datasource-config.xml` to reference the spring configuration file with the Spring module.
```
However, it would be more graceful to name what *Files* labels and reword to something like...
```suggestion
. In the *Spring Config* window *Files* field [is it a field?], add `datasource-config.xml` to reference the spring configuration file with the *Spring module*.
```
And I don't understand what it means to use the syntax `datasource-config.xml` "to reference the spring configuration file with the *Spring module*": are we saying that you reference a file with a module?

. Click *OK*.

> The following screenshoot shows the *Spring Config* configuration:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following screenshoot shows the configuration:
```

.Spring Configuration data source
image::database-spring-configuration.png[Spring Configuration Data Source]

[start=6]
. In the *Global Elements* view, click *Create* to open the *Choose Global Type* window.

> . In the *Filter* field write `database`, select *Database Config* and click *OK*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. In the *Filter* field, type `database`, select *Database Config*, and click *OK*.
```

> . In the *Database Config* window, for *Connection* select *Data Source Reference Connection*.

Reviewer 2: ditto comment about gracefulness in line 25.

. Click *Configure* to add the required JDBC driver and select either: +
+
* *Use local file* +
Install the library using a local file.
* *Add Maven dependency* +
Install a Maven dependency to add to the project.
+

> . For *Data source ref* add the bean id `jdbcDataSource` created in the `datasource-config.xml` bean file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. For *Data source ref*, add the bean id `jdbcDataSource` created in the `datasource-config.xml` bean file.
```

> . Click *Test Connection...* to confirm that Mule can connect to the database.

Reviewer: We don't use the ... in the button name.

. Click *OK*.

> The following screenshoot shows the *Data Source Reference Connection* configuration:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following screenshot shows the configuration:
```
Same as at Line 28, I'm not sure if these are labels displayed in the UI or just names we are calling them without a label.

.Data Source Reference Connection
image::database-datasource-connection.png[Data Source Reference Connection]

> In the XML editor, both the spring and database configuration looks like this:

Reviewer 2: Per the above lines 28 and 48, note that this sentence uses lowercase and no formatting to identify the two configs:
```suggestion
In the XML editor, both the spring and database configurations look like this:
```

Reviewer 2: I'll stop asking about * * vs. ` ` vs. plain init cap vs. lowercase and leave it to you now....

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<spring:config name="datasource" files="datasource-config.xml" />

<db:config name="Database_Config">
   <db:data-source-connection dataSourceRef="jdbcDataSource" />
</db:config>
----

== Configure a Derby Connection

Use the *Derby Connection* type when you want to connect to a Derby database.

The following example shows how to configure a *Derby Connection* in Anypoint Studio:

. In Studio, navigate to the *Global Elements* view.
. Click *Create* to open the *Choose Global Type* view.

> . In the *Filter* field write `database`, select *Database Config* and click *OK*.

Reviewer 2: GLOBAL: "In the *<blah>* field, type....:
```suggestion
. In the *Filter* field, type `database`, select *Database Config*, and click *OK*.
```

> . In the *Database Config* window, for *Connection* select *Derby Connection*.

Reviewer 2: GLOBAL add comma or reword "for grace":
```suggestion
. In the *Database Config* window, for *Connection*, select *Derby Connection*.
```

> . Click *Configure* to add the required Derby JDBC driver and select either: +

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Click *Configure* to add the required Derby JDBC driver and select one of: +
```

+
* *Add recommended library* +
Install the recommended library.
* *Use local file* +
Install the library using a local file.
* *Add Maven dependency* +
Install a Maven dependency to add to the project.
+

> . Set *Database* to `derbyDB`, *Subsub protocol* to `directory`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Set *Database* to `derbyDB` and *Subsub protocol* to `directory`.
```

> . On the *Transactions* tab, optionally specify the transaction isolation, or XA transactions when connecting to the database.

Reviewer 2: Clarify: Is the user choosing between isolation and XA
or
is the user specifying two separate things, transaction isolation and XA transactions?

. On the *Advanced* tab, optionally specify connection pooling and reconnection information, including a reconnection strategy.
. Click *Test Connection* to confirm that Mule can connect to the database.
. Click *OK*.

The following screenshot shows the *Derby Connection* configuration in Studio:

.Derby Connection configuration
image::database-derby-connection.png[Derby Connection configuration]

In the XML editor, the configuration looks like this:
[source,xml,linenums]
----
<db:config name="Database_Config" >
		<db:derby-connection database="derbyDB" />
	</db:config>
----

== Configure a Generic Connection

Use the *Generic Connection* type when you want to connect to:

> * A database for which MuleSoft does not provide a specific connection type.

Reviewer 2: List items here are not sentences, so no period (intro does not count as part of list item):
```suggestion
* A database for which MuleSoft does not provide a specific connection type
```

> * A supported database and you are using custom options that are not included in the connection types.

Reviewer 2: How about making this parallel...if this is what you really mean:
```suggestion
* A database for which MuleSoft does provide a specific connection type but that uses options not included in that connection type
```

The following example shows how to connect to an H2 database in Anypoint Studio:

. In Studio, navigate to the *Global Elements* view.
. Click *Create* to open the *Choose Global Type* view.

> . In the *Filter* field write `database`, select *Database Config* and click *OK*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. In the *Filter* field, type `database`, select *Database Config*, and click *OK*.
```

> . In the *Database Config* window, for *Connection* select *Generic Connection*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. In the *Database Config* window, for *Connection*, select *Generic Connection*.
```

. Click *Configure* to add the required JDBC driver and select either: +
+
* *Use local file* +
Install the library using a local file.
* *Add Maven dependency* +
Install a Maven dependency to add to the project.
+

> . Set the connection *URL* to `jdbc:h2:file:/tmp/datasenseDBand` and *Driver class name* to `org.h2.Driver`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Set *URL* to `jdbc:h2:file:/tmp/datasenseDBand` and *Driver class name* to `org.h2.Driver`.
```

. Click *Test Connection* to validate the connection with the database.
. Click *OK*.

The following screenshot shows the *Generic Connection* configuration in Studio:

.Generic Connection configuration
image::database-generic-connection.png[Generic Connection configuration]

In the XML editor, the configuration looks like this:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<db:config name="Database_Config">
    <db:generic-connection driverClassName="org.h2.Driver"
    url="jdbc:h2:file:/tmp/datasenseDB"/>
</db:config>
----

== Configure a Microsoft SQL Server Connection

Use the *Microsoft SQL Server Connection* type when you want to connect to a Microsoft SQL Server database.

The following example shows how to configure a *Microsoft SQL Server Connection* in Anypoint Studio:

. In Studio, navigate to the *Global Elements* view.
. Click *Create* to open the *Choose Global Type* view.
. In the *Filter* field write `database`, select *Database Config* and click *OK*.

> . In the *Database Config* window, for *Connection* select *Microsoft SQL Server Connection*.

Reviewer 2: ditto previous GLOBAL edits to these two repeated steps; I will stop marking from here on

> . Click *Configure* to add the required Microsoft SQL Server driver and select either: +

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Click *Configure* to add the required Microsoft SQL Server driver and select one of: +
```

+
* *Add recommended library* +
Install the recommended library.
* *Use local file* +
Install the library using a local file.
* *Add Maven dependency* +
Install a Maven dependency to add to the project.
+

> . Set *Host* to `0.0.0.0`, *Port* to `553`, *User* to `Max`, *Password* to `password` and *Database name* to `microsoftDB`.

Reviewer 2: GLOBAL style is to use a comma before the final item in a list ("the Oxford comma"):
```suggestion
. Set *Host* to `0.0.0.0`, *Port* to `553`, *User* to `Max`, *Password* to `password`, and *Database name* to `microsoftDB`.
```

> . On the *Transactions* tab, optionally specify the transaction isolation, or XA transactions when connecting to the database.

Reviewer 2: ditto prev. question about the meaning of this step; see Line 84.

. On the *Advanced* tab, optionally specify connection pooling and reconnection information, including a reconnection strategy.
. Click *Test Connection* to confirm that Mule can connect to the database.
. Click *OK*.

The following screenshot shows the *Microsoft SQL Server Connection* configuration in Studio:

.Microsoft SQL Server Connection configuration
image::database-mssql-connection.png[Microsoft SQL Server Connection configuration]

In the XML editor, the configuration looks like this:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<db:config name="Database_Config">
    <db:mssql-connection
    host="0.0.0.0"
    port="553"
    user="Max"
    password="password"
    databaseName="microsoftDB" />
</db:config>
----

== Configure a MySQL Database Connection

Use the *MySQL Connection* type when you want to connect to a MySQL database.

The following example shows how to configure a *MySQL Connection* in Anypoint Studio:

. In Studio, navigate to the *Global Elements* view.
. Click *Create* to open the *Choose Global Type* view.
. In the *Filter* field write `database`, select *Database Config* and click *OK*.

> . In the *Database Config* window, for *Connection* select *MySQL Connection*.

Reviewer 2: ditto

> . Click *Configure* to add the required MySQL JDBC driver and select either: +

Reviewer 2: Use "either" for two items and "one of" for three or more:
```suggestion
. Click *Configure* to add the required MySQL JDBC driver and select one of: +
```

+
* *Add recommended library* +
Install the recommended library.
* *Use local file* +
Install the library using a local file.
* *Add Maven dependency* +
Install a Maven dependency to add to the project.
+

> . Set *Host* to `0.0.0.0`, *Port* to `3306`, *User* to `Max`, *Password* to `password` and *Database* to `someSchema`.

Reviewer 2: ditto:
```suggestion
. Set *Host* to `0.0.0.0`, *Port* to `3306`, *User* to `Max`, *Password* to `password`, and *Database* to `someSchema`.
```

> . On the *Transactions* tab, optionally specify the transaction isolation, or XA transactions when connecting to the database.

Reviewer 2: ditto question

. On the *Advanced* tab, optionally specify connection pooling and reconnection information, including a reconnection strategy.
. Click *Test Connection* to confirm that Mule can connect to the database.
. Click *OK*.

The following screenshot shows the *MySQL Connection* configuration in Studio:

.MySQL Connection configuration
image::database-mysql-connection.png[MySQL Connection configuration]

In the XML editor, the configuration looks like this:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<db:config name="Database_Config">
  <db:my-sql-connection
  host="0.0.0.0"
  port="3306"
  user="Max"
  password="POWERS"
  database="mysqlDB"/>
</db:config>
----

== Configure an Oracle Connection

Use the *Oracle Connection* type when you want to connect to an Oracle database.

The following example shows how to configure an *Oracle Connection* in Anypoint Studio:

. In Studio, navigate to the *Global Elements* view.
. Click *Create* to open the *Choose Global Type* view.
. In the *Filter* field write `database`, select *Database Config* and click *OK*.

> . In the *Database Config* window, for *Connection* select **Oracle Connection**.

Reviewer 2: ditto

. Click *Configure* to add the required Oracle JDBC driver and select either: +

> +

Reviewer 2: periods

* *Use local file* +
Install the library using a local file.
* *Add Maven dependency* +
Install a Maven dependency to add to the project.
+

> . Set *Host* to `192.168.99.100`, *Port* to `1521`, *User* to `system`, *Password* to `oracle` and *Instance* to `xe`.

Reviewer 2: comma

> . On the *Transactions* tab, optionally specify the transaction isolation, or XA transactions when connecting to the database.

Reviewer 2: question

. On the *Advanced* tab, optionally specify connection pooling and reconnection information, including a reconnection strategy.
. Click *Test Connection* to confirm that Mule can connect to the database.
. Click *OK*.

The following screenshot shows the *Oracle Connection* configuration in Studio:

.Oracle Connection configuration
image::database-oracle-connection.png[Oracle Connection configuration]

In the XML editor, the configuration looks like this:

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<db:config name="Database_Config">
  <db:oracle-connection
  host="192.168.99.100"
  port="1521" instance="xe"
  user="system"
  password="oracle" />
</db:config>
----

== Configure the JDBC Driver

After you configure the connections, you can add the JDBC driver. The following example shows how to add a driver for the MySQL database:

> . In Studio, you can add the driver using any of the following options:

Reviewer 2: Just two options, right?
```suggestion
. In Studio, you can add the driver using either of the following options:
```

* In the *Database Config* window, click *Configure*, select *Add Maven dependency*, and pick the dependency:
+
.Pick Maven dependency
image::database-dependency.png[Pick Maven dependency]
+

> * Add the dependency directly in your project's `pom.xml` file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Add the dependency directly to your project's `pom.xml` file:
```

+
[source,xml,linenums]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>mysql</groupId>
    <artifactId>mysql-connector-java</artifactId>
    <version>5.1.48</version>
</dependency>
----
+

> . Through your `pom.xml` file, make Mule expose the driver dependency to the Database Connector:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Configure your `pom.xml` file so that Mule exposes the driver dependency to Database Connector:
```

+
[source,xml,linenums]
----
<build>
    <plugins>
        <!-- Only used to declare the shared libraries-->
        <plugin>
            <groupId>org.mule.tools.maven</groupId>
            <artifactId>mule-maven-plugin</artifactId>
            <version>1.0.0</version>
            <configuration>
                <sharedLibraries>
                    <sharedLibrary>
                        <groupId>mysql</groupId>
                        <artifactId>mysql-connector-java</artifactId>
                    </sharedLibrary>
                </sharedLibraries>
            </configuration>
        </plugin>
    </plugins>
</build>
----

== Configure Connection Pools

> Establishing connections is costly in terms of connectors, relational database management system (RDBMS) network, and processing overhead. Database Connector supports the *Pooling profile* parameter that enables you to build a connection pool to provide several connections.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Establishing connections is costly in terms of connectors, relational database management system (RDBMS) network, and processing overhead. Database Connector supports the `Pooling profile` parameter that enables you to build a connection pool to provide several connections.
```
I went ahead and changed this because the sentence specifies "parameter".

But I think you GLOBALLY should change the boldface...:
- connection types to plain font, and lowercase
- configuration types and names to plain font
- syntax (parameters, options, files, directories...) to monospace font

Leave references to UI labels in bold: windows, tabs, fields, and so on.

Reviewer 2: I've gone back to not marking these because there are so many.

> All connection type configurations, except the *Data Source Reference Connection*, accept the *Pooling profile* configuration. In JDBC, pooling occurs at the data source level. Therefore, to do pooling, you have to configure the global data source.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All connection type configurations, except the *Data Source Reference Connection*, accept the *Pooling profile* configuration. In JDBC, pooling occurs at the data source level, so to enable pooling you have to configure the global data source.
```

The following example shows how to configure the *Pooling profile* parameter for a MySQL database connection:

> . In the *Database Config* window, in the *Advanced* tab, for *Pooling profile* select *Edit inline*.

Reviewer 2: ditto wording/comma

> . Set *Max pool size* to `5`, *Min pool size* to `0`, *Acquire increment* to `1`, *Prepared statement cache size* to `5`, *Max wait* to `0`, *Max wait unit* to `SECONDS (Default)` and *Max idle time* to `0`.

Reviewer 2: ditto comma

. Enable the *Additional properties* parameter. +

> These additional properties do not override any of the main properties, if any of those were previously set.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These additional properties do not override any previously set main properties.
```

. Click the (*+*) plus sign to add a new property.

> . In the *Additional property* window, set *Key* to `checkoutTimeout`, *Value* to `1000`, and click *Finish*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. In the *Additional property* window, set *Key* to `checkoutTimeout` and *Value* to `1000`, and then click *Finish*.
```

> . Add a new property, set *Key* to `idleConnectionTestPeriod`, *Value* to `2`, and click *Finish*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. To add a new property, set *Key* to `idleConnectionTestPeriod` and *Value* to `2`, and then click *Finish*.
```
But...a second "Finish" step? Is this leftover/orig text that was not deleted when replaced?

The following screenshot shows the configuration in Studio:

.Pooling Profile Configuration
image::database-pooling-configuration.png[Pooling Profile Configuration]

> In the XML editor, the configuration uses the `<db:pooling-profile>` element, rather than the standard Mule `<pooling-profile>` element because databases have special pooling attributes, such as the `preparedStatementCacheSize` element:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the XML editor, the configuration uses the `<db:pooling-profile>` element rather than the standard Mule `<pooling-profile>` element because databases have special pooling attributes, such as the `preparedStatementCacheSize` element:
```

[source,xml,linenums]
----
<db:config name="Database_Config">
    <db:my-sql-connection database="mozart_test" host="${host}" password="${password}" port="${port}" user="${user}">
        <db:pooling-profile acquireIncrement="1" maxPoolSize="5" maxWait="0" maxWaitUnit="SECONDS" minPoolSize="0" preparedStatementCacheSize="5"/>
        <db:additional-properties>
            <db:additional-property key="checkoutTimeout" value="1000"/>
            <db:additional-property key="idleConnectionTestPeriod" value="2" />
        </db:additional-properties>
    </db:my-sql-connection>
</db:config>
----

== Configure an Oracle Connection with TNS Names

The following example shows how to configure a *Generic Connection* to connect to an Oracle database that relies on the `tnsnames.ora` file.

> If a firewall is between your Mule runtime engine and the database, use the `ENABLE=BROKEN` parameter to enable a keep-alive connection at the TNS connection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a firewall separates your Mule runtime engine from the database, use the `ENABLE=BROKEN` parameter to enable a keep-alive connection at the TNS connection.
```

If a keep-alive connection is not set, the connection can drop traffic due to expiring inactivity timers.

. In Studio, navigate to the *Global Elements* view.
. Click *Create* to open the *Choose Global Type* view.
. In the *Filter* field write `database`, select *Database Config* and click *OK*.

> . In the *Database Config* window, for *Connection* select *Generic Connection*.

Reviewer 2: ditto

. Click *Configure* to add the required JDBC driver and select either: +
+
* *Use local file* +
Install the library using a local file.
* *Add Maven dependency* +
Install a Maven dependency to add to the project.
+

> . Set the connection *URL* to `jdbc:oracle:thin:${oracle.user}/${oracle.password}@(DESCRIPTION=(ENABLE=BROKEN)(FAILOVER=ON)(ADDRESS_LIST=(ADDRESS=(PROTOCOL=TCP)(HOST=${oracle.host1})(PORT=${oracle.port}))(ADDRESS=(PROTOCOL=TCP)(HOST=${oracle.host2})(PORT=${oracle.port}))(CONNECT_DATA=(SERVICE_NAME=${oracle.service})))`.

Reviewer 2: Please doublecheck the final number of )
